README.md, before:

# Night Shift: Extraction

A complete starter repo for a browser-based top-down **2D multiplayer grid game** using only open-web tech:
- **Client:** HTML/CSS/JavaScript + `<canvas>` 2D rendering
- **Server:** Node.js + WebSocket (`ws`) with authoritative simulation
- **Persistence:** JSON file store (`/server/data/users.json`) for XP + level by username

Designed to run in **GitHub Codespaces** (or locally) with one command.

---

## Quick Start (Codespaces + local)

```bash
npm install
npm run dev
```

Then open `http://localhost:3000`.

> Multiplayer test: open multiple browser tabs/windows and join with different usernames.

---

## Game Loop Overview

### Phases
1. **Day (45s)**
   - Full map visibility for all players.
   - Collect resources from adjacent trees/rocks.
   - Step on chest tiles for random loot.
   - Checkpoints are walkable but do not provide safety.

2. **Night (60s)**
   - Enemies spawn and chase the nearest non-safe player.
   - Each new night increases enemy pressure with larger waves.
   - Checkpoints become safe respite areas (enemies avoid them, players there are not targeted).
   - Team objective: **all players must reach objective tile(s)** before time runs out.
   - Visibility is masked by darkness; torch tier increases vision radius.
   - Win = XP reward and round reset to day. Fail = round reset to day.

### Inventory + Auto-Craft
- Materials: `wood`, `stone`, `cloth`, `oil`, `pebbles`
- Gear tiers (0-3): `torch`, `bat`, `slingshot`
- Press **E** to auto-craft/upgrade (server-validated):
  1. craft Torch T1, then Bat T1, then Slingshot T1
  2. then upgrades Torch → Bat → Slingshot up to tier 3

Recipes:
- Torch T1: `2 wood + 1 cloth`
- Torch upgrade: `+2 wood +1 oil` per tier
- Bat T1: `3 wood`
- Bat upgrade: `+2 wood +1 stone` per tier
- Slingshot T1: `2 wood + 2 pebbles`
- Slingshot upgrade: `+1 wood +2 pebbles +1 cloth` per tier

### Combat / Interaction
- **Space** attack:
  - Slingshot equipped: fires a projectile (stuns enemies briefly)
  - Else bat equipped: short melee stun
- Torch increases night vision radius; daytime ignores flashlight tiers and darkness masking.

---

## Controls
- **Move:** WASD / Arrow keys
- **Auto-craft / auto-upgrade:** E
- **Attack:** Space
- **Cycle behavior:** Day is bright and fully visible; night enables darkness + flashlight radius
- **Camera/Exploration:** viewport is fixed while camera follows your player across a larger world

---

## Project Structure

```text
NightShift/
  client/
    index.html
    styles.css
    main.js
  server/
    data/
      users.json
    constants.js
    game.js
    index.js
    map.js
    persistence.js
  package.json
  README.md
```

---

## Networking & Simulation Notes

- Authoritative server simulation loop at **60 ticks/sec**.
- Snapshot broadcast every **100ms** (~10Hz).
- Client sends compact input state (`movement`, `craft`, `attack`).
- Server decides movement collision, crafting validity, enemy AI, phase transitions, objective win/fail, and XP updates.

---

## Persistence

User profile persistence in `/server/data/users.json`:
- keyed by username
- stores `xp` and `level`
- loaded on join
- saved on XP changes and disconnect

Level formula:

```js
level = Math.floor(Math.sqrt(xp / 50)) + 1;
```

---

## Next Steps (student-friendly enhancements)

1. Add a **minimap** and fog-of-war explored tiles.
2. Add a minimap for zone-aware navigation and long-distance objective tracking.
3. Add enemy variants (fast scout, tank, ranged) and smarter pathfinding around obstacles.
4. Add item durability + simple crafting UI queue while keeping server authoritative.
5. Add match history and per-user stats (wins, best extraction time) to the JSON profile.

Commit message:

Add destructible safe zones with entrance-gated protection

README.md, after:

# Night Shift: Extraction

A complete starter repo for a browser-based top-down **2D multiplayer grid game** using only open-web tech:
- **Client:** HTML/CSS/JavaScript + `<canvas>` 2D rendering
- **Server:** Node.js + WebSocket (`ws`) with authoritative simulation
- **Persistence:** JSON file store (`/server/data/users.json`) for XP + level by username

Designed to run in **GitHub Codespaces** (or locally) with one command.

---

## Quick Start (Codespaces + local)

```bash
npm install
npm run dev
```

Then open `http://localhost:3000`.

> Multiplayer test: open multiple browser tabs/windows and join with different usernames.

---

## Game Loop Overview

### Phases
1. **Day (45s)**
   - Full map visibility for all players.
   - Collect resources from adjacent trees/rocks.
   - Step on chest tiles for random loot.
   - Checkpoints are walkable but do not provide safety.

2. **Night (60s)**
   - Enemies spawn and chase the nearest non-safe player.
   - Each new night increases enemy pressure with larger waves.
   - Safe zones can protect players from direct enemy targeting, but only after entering through a zone entrance tile.
   - If everyone is sheltered in safe zones, enemies attack zone entrances instead; each hit reduces zone durability.
   - When a zone reaches 0 durability, it is destroyed and no longer grants protection.
   - Team objective: **all players must reach objective tile(s)** before time runs out.
   - Visibility is masked by darkness; torch tier increases vision radius.
   - Win = XP reward and round reset to day. Fail = round reset to day.

### Inventory + Auto-Craft
- Materials: `wood`, `stone`, `cloth`, `oil`, `pebbles`
- Gear tiers (0-3): `torch`, `bat`, `slingshot`
- Press **E** to auto-craft/upgrade (server-validated):
  1. craft Torch T1, then Bat T1, then Slingshot T1
  2. then upgrades Torch → Bat → Slingshot up to tier 3

Recipes:
- Torch T1: `2 wood + 1 cloth`
- Torch upgrade: `+2 wood +1 oil` per tier
- Bat T1: `3 wood`
- Bat upgrade: `+2 wood +1 stone` per tier
- Slingshot T1: `2 wood + 2 pebbles`
- Slingshot upgrade: `+1 wood +2 pebbles +1 cloth` per tier

### Combat / Interaction
- **Space** attack:
  - Slingshot equipped: fires a projectile (stuns enemies briefly)
  - Else bat equipped: short melee stun
- Torch increases night vision radius; daytime ignores flashlight tiers and darkness masking.

---

## Controls
- **Move:** WASD / Arrow keys
- **Auto-craft / auto-upgrade:** E
- **Attack:** Space
- **Cycle behavior:** Day is bright and fully visible; night enables darkness + flashlight radius
- **Camera/Exploration:** viewport is fixed while camera follows your player across a larger world

---


### Safe Zone Rules
- Each safe zone has a name, entrance tile(s), and durability (`remainingHits` / `maxHits`).
- Protection only applies at night and only after crossing into the zone via an entrance tile.
- Enemies will not enter an intact safe zone interior, but can gather at entrances and attack the zone itself when all players are sheltered.
- Destroyed zones behave like normal tiles and no longer provide safety.

## Project Structure

```text
NightShift/
  client/
    index.html
    styles.css
    main.js
  server/
    data/
      users.json
    constants.js
    game.js
    index.js
    map.js
    persistence.js
  package.json
  README.md
```

---

## Networking & Simulation Notes

- Authoritative server simulation loop at **60 ticks/sec**.
- Snapshot broadcast every **100ms** (~10Hz).
- Client sends compact input state (`movement`, `craft`, `attack`).
- Server decides movement collision, crafting validity, enemy AI, phase transitions, objective win/fail, and XP updates.

---

## Persistence

User profile persistence in `/server/data/users.json`:
- keyed by username
- stores `xp` and `level`
- loaded on join
- saved on XP changes and disconnect

Level formula:

```js
level = Math.floor(Math.sqrt(xp / 50)) + 1;
```

---

## Next Steps (student-friendly enhancements)

1. Add a **minimap** and fog-of-war explored tiles.
2. Add a minimap for zone-aware navigation and long-distance objective tracking.
3. Add enemy variants (fast scout, tank, ranged) and smarter pathfinding around obstacles.
4. Add item durability + simple crafting UI queue while keeping server authoritative.
5. Add match history and per-user stats (wins, best extraction time) to the JSON profile.
